Why you're not landing your interview

As an instructor (and former student) at a front-end development bootcamp, and a former theatre director who has sat through hundreds if not thousands of auditions, I've spent a lot of time interviewing and being interviewed. I am constantly astonished by the small things that people don't do in interviews that would increase their chances one hundredfold.

This has become even more true since transitioning from the arts world to web development, where we attract, dare I say, some unique personality types.

Here's a list of ten tangible things that you can do to improve the likelihood of getting hired, or at least making it to the next stage of the interview process. Most people don't do the majority of these things, so if you do, you will be lightyears ahead of them.

These are all going to sound super obvious, so apologies if these feel redundant to you, but I promise you - most people don't do them, and it is costing them jobs. Before you dismiss them, assess whether you are really doing everything on this list.

0. Dress Appropriately
In most jobs this would mean a suit, or something similarly formal. More often than not, this is not the case in the web dev world, and sometimes showing up in a suit to a creative agency can be as bad as showing up to a wedding in a muscle shirt and sandles.

Find out what people who work there wear on a daily basis, and wear the nicest version of that.

0. Confirm your interview
A day or two before your interview, send a quick e-mail to confirm that you're still on. Make sure that you include the date and time of the interview in the e-mail so that the person doesn't have to spend too much time cross-referencing your name with their calendar.

If they've sent you a confirmation themselves at some point in the week leading up to your interview, I usually skip this step.

1. Be early, but not too early.
Fifteen minutes is perfect. It shows preparation and professionalism, that you take the interview seriously, and gives you a little bit of cushion in case the office is hard to find or you get lost.

Do not be more than twenty minutes early - it shows a kind of unhealthy eagerness and feels unfashionable, and maybe makes it seem like you didn't know what time your interview was supposed to be at.

2. A firm handshake, eye contact
Do not undervalue this, it is so so important. A lot of traditions have gone by the wayside, but this one is still a cornerstone in the dev interview process.

A limp or overly firm handshake is bad - it will make the interviewer uneasy or unimpressed, and can set a bad tone for the interview. If you're not sure, practice with some friends - they'll let you know if you're squeezing too tight.

3. Remember their names
When you first meet your interviewers, they will (probably) tell you their names. Remember them. When it feels right to organically insert them into the conversation, do it.

Using the name of a person you've just met demonstrates confidence as well will unconsciously set them at ease. You have to be careful with this one - if you don't use it organically, if can feel really forced and have completely the opposite affect.

4. When they ask if you have any questions, make sure you have one, make sure its a good one, and make sure it's a genuine question.
This one might be a bit more controversial, but "no" is a lazy answer and at best has a neutral affect on your interview.

If you've done your research (see step 6), chances are you will have a question about their company.

About the question:
- It needs to be a genuine question - not something that you're asking just to prove you looked at their website. Interviewers aren't stupid.
- It shouldn't be threatening - questions like "why should I work for you" put the interviewer at unease and will make them turn on you.
- It shouldn't be answerable with a simple 'yes' or 'no', but it also shouldn't require a war and peace type response. You want to give the interviewer the opportunity to elaborate if they want to, or keep it short if they're tired and hungry.

5. Don't be afraid to say you don't know.
If they ask you about a technology that you don't know, don't lie and say that you do know it. If they catch you in the lie, you're toast. Chances are it isn't a big deal that you don't know it anyway, and most places will be happy to have someone teach you. If you don't know a piece of tech and they aren't willing to offer any mentorship, you definitely don't want that job anyway since it will be a veil of tears anyway.

There is a right and wrong way to say you don't know. If they ask you if you know React Native and you don't, you want to say something like 'no, but I'm familiar with react/framework x/javascript, and I would be really excited to dig into something like that'. Demonstrating an eagerness to learn can be just as/more important than knowing whatever technology that company is using.

6. Be yourself*
Okay, so I put a big ol' asterisks next to this one because 'be yourself' is a pretty broad piece of advice to give.

I think a lot of people make the mistake of trying to be someone else in an interview. It always feels forced. Don't try and be someone else - be yourself. But remember that there are lots of facets to you. Be the version of yourself that your partner would want to introduce to their parents. Friendly but not too familiar, mature but not too cold.




3. Be yourself*
4. Be early, but not too early.
5. Dress appropriately
6. Be passionate.
7. Do your research.
8. Confirm your interview.
9. Follow up
10. Be memorable.
11. Don't be afraid to say you don't know. But find out.
